Target Tracking During Interruption in the Multiple-Object Tracking Task

David E. Fencsik, Todd S. Horowitz, Skyler S. Place, Sarah B. Klieger, and Jeremy M. Wolfe

Observers can successfully track a subset of independently moving
identical objects in a multiple-object tracking task, even if all
objects disappear for a 300-500 ms gap. How observers reacquire
targets following such a gap reveals what kinds of information they
maintain for moving objects. With identical objects, only two types of
information are available: location and trajectory. In Experiment 1,
objects disappeared and then reappeared at one of three locations: the
point of disappearance ("stay" condition"), the position predicted by
continued motion during the gap ("forward"), or the position predicted
if the object had reversed direction during the gap ("reverse"). We
found that tracking accuracy in the stay condition was superior to
both the forward and reverse conditions, which were equivalent,
supporting the use of location information in target
reacquisition. Experiment 2 replicated Experiment 1, but with a
condition in which objects disappeared one at a time. In this case,
tracking accuracy in the forward condition, while still worse than in
the stay condition, was now superior to that in the reverse condition.
In Experiment 3, objects always reappeared in the forward position. In
the motion condition, objects moved before they disappeared. In the
static condition, they were stationary before the gap but reappeared
in the forward position. Tracking performance was better in the motion
condition. Experiments 2 and 3 support the use of trajectory
information in target reacquisition. Taken together, the results
indicate that the visual system maintains both types of information
about tracked objects, selectively favoring one or the other in
reacquisition depending on the nature of the task. More speculatively,
we suggest that there may be two distinct mechanisms: one for general
task-postponement during simultaneous offset (see Horowitz et al., VSS
2004), and the other for maintaining object continuity during
single-object disappearance or occlusion.

Supported by NIH grant MH065576 to TSH.
