Rapid recovery of moving targets following task disruption

David E. Fencsik, Skyler S. Place, and Todd S. Horowitz

Driving an automobile involves simultaneously performing a variety of
tasks: the driver must maintain control of the vehicle, react to
traffic signals, plan a route, and often carry out these tasks while
also listening to music or carrying on conversations with passengers.
However, all these tasks are secondary to the basic need to monitor
the environment, a continuously shifting collection of lanes,
sidewalks, traffic signs, pedestrians, and other vehicles.  In order
to successfully maneuver through traffic, we must have cognitive
mechanisms that can keep track of a set of moving objects, focusing on
those that are most important and ignoring the rest, and accomodate
brief disruptions from other tasks.  In the present paper, we focus
on the ability of the tracking mechanisms to recover from disruption.

[The previous paragraph could start out by talking about tracking as
fundamental to driving, then talk about the need to deal with
distraction.]

One way to study tracking mechanisms in the laboratory is through the
multiple object tracking (MOT) task (Pylyshyn & Storm, 1988).  During
a trial in a typical MOT study, observers are asked to keep track of a
subset of stimuli ("targets") as they move independently around a
display.  After several seconds of tracking, all stimuli stop, and the
observer indicates whether or not a probed stimulus was a target; both
the accuracy and latency of each response may be measured as dependent
variables.

In most versions of the MOT task, all the stimuli are identical
(except during the initial target-cuing phase and the final probe
phase), so observers can only distinguish targets from distractors by
following each stimulus' trajectory during the trial.  While identical
stimuli may seem unrealistically impoverished (after all, cars may be
distinguished by multiple features, including size, color, and model),
this task does allow us to ask fundamental questions about the
mechanisms used to track moving objects, such how many objects one can
track (Pylyshyn & Storm, 1988), what kinds of information may be
maintained for tracked objects (Fencsik, Klieger, & Horowitz, in
press; Horowitz et al., in press; Oksama & Hyona, 2004), how tracking
mechanisms cope with object disappearance (Horowitz, Birnkrant,
Fencsik, Tran, & Wolfe, 2006; Keane & Pylyshyn, 2006; Scholl &
Pylyshyn, 1999), and what kinds of secondary tasks interfere with
tracking (Alvarez, Horowitz, Arsenio, DiMase, & Wolfe, 2005).

Two previous findings from MOT-based studies are most relevant here.
First, that observers can typically track around 4-5 targets out of
8-10 total objects (Pylyshyn & Storm, 1988).  This demonstrates that
there is a mechanism capable of tracking multiple moving objects
without relying on visible distinguishing characteristics.  Second,
that observers can track successfully even if the tracked stimuli
disappear briefly (Fencsik et al., in press; Horowitz et al., 2006;
Keane & Pylyshyn, 2006; Scholl & Pylyshyn, 1999).  This demonstrates
that mechanisms exist to maintain information relevant to the tracking
task when target stimuli disappear, then resume tracking once they
reappear.

Next...differences it types of disappearance and evidence of different
mechanisms to support each.

Then...how do we recover from disruption?  Bring in evidence from
task-switching studies.

The present paper focuses on how the visual system deals with the
temporary disappearance of moving objects. People can continue to
track objects that disappear briefly behind occluding surfaces. Scholl
and Pylyshyn (1999) demonstrated this using a multiple object tracking
(MOT) task, in which participants track a subset of identical,
independently moving objects. Accuracy on the task was unaffected on
trials when tracked objects moved behind occluding surfaces, as
compared to trials without occlusion. However, when objects
spontaneously disappeared and then reappeared without occlusion cues,
but for the same amount of time as on occlusion trials, accuracy was
substantially decreased compared to the other trials. It appears that
the visual system assumes that an occluded object still exists and
therefore continues to track it, while an object that spontaneously
disappears must no longer exist and ceases to track it (see also
Scholl & Feigenson, 2004).

On the face of it, this is an entirely reasonable assumption: in the
real world, when you are gazing at an object, the only way it can
disappear is through occlusion. Based on the findings of Scholl and
Pylyshyn (1999), it appears that the visual system continues to track
such objects. However, objects can also disappear when gaze is shifted
temporarily, in which case all tracked objects will disappear, then
reappear, simultaneously. Given that a shift in gaze may mean that a
new set of stimuli need to be tracked, there should be some
psychological mechanism that enables disengagement from the tracking
task, followed by re-engagement and reacquisition of tracked targets.

In previous work, we have demonstrated that observers can successfully
perform a MOT task when all the stimuli disappear simultaneously for a
brief (approximately 300 ms) gap.  Horowitz, Birnkrant, Wolfe, and
Fencsik (in press) showed that tracking through such a gap is more
difficult when the stimuli appear to move behind occluding surfaces
than when they disappear suddenly, without occlusion.  This result is
the opposite of Scholl and Pylyshyn's (1999) finding that occlusion
cues facilitate tracking when a single object disappears.  This
dissociation suggests that the mechanisms underlying tracking during
simultaneous disappearance are not the same as those that subserve
active tracking of visible objects.  In fact, Alvarez, Horowitz,
Arsenio, DiMase, and Wolfe (2005) showed that performance of a second
task during a gap in tracking had almost no effect on tracking
itself.

These results indicate that there must be some mechanism separate from
the tracking mechanism that enables temporary postponement of the
tracking task during a gap.  information relevant to tracking is
stored by this mechanism and is used to reacquire targets following
reappearance. In a recent paper (Fencsik, Klieger, & Horowitz,
submitted), we provided evidence that observers performing an MOT task
may remember both an object's location and direction of motion prior
to the gap; while they may use either type of information to reacquire
targets after the gap, they seem to have more location information
available and tend to favor using it for target reacquisition. In the
present work, we focus on the timecourse of target reacquisition:
Following the temporary disappearance of all tracked objects, how long
does the visual system take to resume tracking the targets.

To study the timecourse of target reacquisition, we present a series
of experiments using the MOT task with a gap in tracking.  Following
the gap at a variable delay, one stimulus was probed.  Observers
classified the probed stimulus as a tracked target or an untracked
distractor; a target was probed on half of the trials, and a
distractor was probed on the remaining trials.  We measured the speed
and accuracy of responses to the probe as a function of probe onset
latency in order to determine how long it took for observers to
reacquire the targets.

If, on a trial with a target probe, the probe onsets after target
reacquisition has been completed for the probed target, then an
accurate decision can be made immediately and reaction time (RT) will
not include any time to reacquire the target.  However, if the probe
onsets before the probed target had been reacquired, then response
will be slowed until reacquisition of that target has been completed.
In order to measure the minimum RT to respond to a probe, we included
a control condition in which there was no gap.

We used the results of our experiments to distinguish between two
broad classes of hypotheses about target reacquisition.  First, one
could propose that target reacquisition occurs in serial, such that
targets are reacquired one at a time with some additional amount of
time needed for each individual target.  Second, target reacquisition
could be a parallel process, in which all targets are reacquired
simultaneously, with no additional cost in time from each individual
target.  In general terms, serial hypotheses would predict longer
target reacquisition times---on the order of a hundred
milliseconds---than would a parallel process---on the order of tens of
milliseconds, or possibly instantaneous reacquisition.

Discuss comparison with baseline (no-gap) condition

rule out apparent motion


General Methods


Experiment 1 (ProbeTrack1)

In Experiment 1, we introduce the basic methodology and observe that
target reacquisition occurs quite rapidly, in 80 ms or less. In this
experiment, the volunteers ranged in age from ??-?? (mean?; gender
distribution). Initially, observers performed 50 trials with no gap,
followed by 200 trials with a gap (see the General Methods for more
details).  During the trials with a gap, the probe onset either 0, 80,
320, or 1280 ms (0, 6, 24, or 96 frames) after the stimuli
reappeared. Probe onset delay was randomized within block.  This
design resulted in 50 trials per level of probe delay (25 target probe
and 25 distractor probe).

Figure 1A shows average RT for correct responses as a function of
probe delay separately for probe-target and probe-distractor
trials. The main effect of probe type was reliable, with shorter RTs
to target probes (MEAN) than distractor probes (MEAN); F-TEST. The
main effect of probe delay was also probably reliable, but I don't
know because I have no data; F-TEST. XXX Do planned pairwise
comparisons for each successive probe delay for each probe type
XXX. The dashed horizontal lines indicate baseline performance on each
probe type from the no-gap trials, and the error bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals for the repeated measures comparison of each
data-point from the no-gap RT (Masson & Loftus, 2003).  Clearly, only
the values at 0 ms are reliably different from baseline; at 0 ms, p <
.XXX, otherwise, p > .XXX.

Figure 1B plots sensitivity to the probe's identity as target or
distractor, measured using d' (MacMillan & Creelman, 2005), as a
function of probe delay. XXX Are there any reliable effects here? XXX
Again, the error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals based on the
comparisons between each point and baseline sensitivity. Performance
with a gap was reliably below performance without a gap at all probe
delays.

This shows us that response time hits baseline levels within 80 ms of
stimulus reappearance. However, accuracy remains low across probe
delays.  This is okay, because it merely indicates that they didn't
recover all targets, but it suggests that at least some of the RTs
come from guesses, which could be problemmatical.


Experiment 2 (ProbeTrack2)

In Experiment 2, we expanded the range of probe delays to investigate
the timecourse of target reacquisition more carefully. Observers, one
of whom had participated in Experiment 1, ranged in age from ??-??
(mean ?; N females, 8-N males).  Observers performed 50 trials with no
gap, followed by XXX 250 or 300 XXX trials with a gap.  During trials
with a gap, the probe onset either 0, 40, 80, 120, 160, or 1280 ms (0,
3, 6, 9, 12, or 96 frames) after the stimuli reappeared. Probe onset
delay was randomized within block.  This design resulted in 50 trials
per level of probe delay (25 target probe and 25 distractor probe).

Figure 2A shows average RT for correct responses as a function of
probe delay separately for probe-target and probe-distractor
trials. The main effect of probe type was reliable, with shorter RTs
to target probes (MEAN) than distractor probes (MEAN); F-TEST. The
main effect of probe delay was also reliable in all likelihood, but I
haven't got the analysis yet; F-TEST. XXX Do planned pairwise
comparisons XXX. Again, the horizontal lines indicate baseline
performance from the no-gap trials, and the error bars show the 95%
confidence intervals for the comparison between the RTs from the gap
trials and the average RT from the no-gap trials.  Only the values at
0 ms are reliable different from baseline; at 0 ms, p < .XXX,
otherwise, p > .XXX.

XXX What's the story in the accuracy data?  Probably the same as for
Experiment 1. XXX

These results confirm and extend the findings from Experiment
1. RT to the probe was lengthened only when the probe onset
concurrently with stimulus reappearance, and returned to baseline
levels immediately after reappearance. The present results suggest
that targets are reacquired within 40 ms of reappearance. This finding
is consistent with the hypothesis that targets are reacquired rapidly,
most likely in parallel.


Experiment 3 (ProbeTrack3)

In Experiment 3, we generalize our findings from the earlier
experiments to a wider range of gap durations.  In the first two
experiments, the stimuli disappeared for a gap of 133 ms on every
trial.  In Experiment 3, we added trial blocks with gap durations of
307 ms and 507 ms.

Beyond simply generalizing the results from the previous experiments,
Experiment 3 allows us to test an alternative hypothesis, that the
performance with a short gap does not require task postponement.  If
this were the case, then participants would not lose the targets
during the gap and would not have to reacquire them after it.
According to this hypothesis, then, the finding in previous
experiments that post-gap RTs equalled no-gap RTs at short probe
delays is uninteresting.  However, at longer gap durations, observers
do seem to postpone the tracking task, storing information about it in
a separate mechanism until the stimuli reappear (Alvarez, et al.,
2005).  Thus, the alternative hypothesis predicts that it should take
longer after the gap for RT to return to baseline levels on trials
with larger gap durations---that is, the RT by probe delay functions
observed in Experiments 1 and 2 should be shifted to the right at the
longer gap durations in Experiment 3.

However, if a 133 ms gap is long enough to require postponement of the
tracking task, then there should be no difference in RT across gap
durations.  This will confirm our previous findings, that target
reacquisition seems to completed very rapidly following the gap.

The procedure was based on Experiment 2.  The observers included two
volunteers who had participated in the earlier experiments and six
naive volunteers.  They ranged in age from ??-?? (mean ?; N females,
8-N males).  Observers performed a block of 50 trials with no gap,
followed by three blocks of 400 trials each with gap durations of 133,
307, or 507 ms (10, 23, or 38 frames, respectively).  The order of the
different gap durations was counterbalanced across subjects.

Figure ?? shows RT as a function of probe delay.  XXX F-TEST and
t-TESTS XXX

One potential concern is that a speed-accuracy tradeoff may have
contaminated the results of Experiment 2.  While RT was not reliably
affected by gap duration, accuracy did declined with gap duration.  Thus,
there is a possibility that observered decrease their accuracy in
order to maintain consistent RTs across gap durations.  This
possibility is testable.  If it is true, then observers must have
maintained RT by guessing before they were certain of their response,
so incorrect responses  should be faster than correct responses, and
this difference should increase with gap duration.  XXX Plot this and
test it XXX

These results clearly reject the alternate hypothesis described above.
Observers were no less efficient recovering targets after a 300 ms or
500 ms gap than they were after a 133 ms gap, suggesting that the
mechanisms used for target recovery are the same across gap durations.
Given that 500 ms gaps are known to require task postponement (Alvarez
et al., 2005; Horowitz et al., in press), we may conclude that all of
the experiments involved postponement of the tracking task during the
gap, followed by target recovery after the gap.


Experiment 4 (ProbeTrack4/3B and ProbeTrack5/3C)

In Experiment 4, we test whether targets are recovered one-at-a-time
(i.e., by a serial process) or all-at-once (i.e., parallel).  To
accomplish this, we varied the tracking load from one to four targets.
If target recovery is a serial process, then it should take longer to
recover all the targets as the tracking load increases.  This will be
apparent at the shortest probe delays as a systematic increase in
response time with tracking load, as it takes longer, on average, to
recover the targets and determine whether or not the probed stimulus
was a target.  However, if target recovery occurs in parallel, there
should be no systematic relationship between tracking load and
response time.

Given that four targets may be recovered within 40 ms, we do not
expect to observe any effects beyond the 0 ms probe delay.  We collect
data from multiple probe delays, but our analysis of the relationship
between response time and tracking load focuses only on the 0 ms probe
delay.

Experiment 4 actually consisted of two sub-experiments.  Experiment 4a
allowed us to estimate baseline performance at each tracking load with
no gap, and Experiment 4b manipulated probe delay following a gap of
307 ms (23 frames).  Experiment 4a included 8 naive volunteers; their
age ranged from ??-??  (mean ??; ?? females).  Experiment 4b included
8 volunteers, with 4 of them having participated in previous
experiments (not including Experiment 4a); their age ranged from ??-??
(mean ??; ?? females).  At the beginning of each experiment, observers
performed 50 trials with no gap.  In Experiment 4a, they then
performed four trial blocks, each with 200 trials at one of the four
tracking loads.  In Experiment 4b, observers also performed four
blocks, one at each tracking load, but each block included four probe
delays (0, 80, 320, and 1280 ms) randomly mixed within the block.

Overall, the effects of probe delay on accuracy and RT were similar to
the previous experiments and will not be discussed further.  Figure ??
plots RT as a function of tracking load for Experiments 4a and 4b.  We
conducted a repeated measures ANOVA investigating RT as a function of
tracking load and found blah blah 

These results are inconsistent with a serial process, which would
predict a systematic relationship between RT and tracking load.
Instead, they support the hypothesis that target recovery occurs in
parllel, with all targets recovered simultaneously.


Discussion

The experiments presented above show that recovery of moving targets
after a brief disappearance occurs rapidly and in parallel.  By 40 ms
after the tracked stimuli reappeared, observers could distinguish
targets from distractors as quickly as if the stimuli had never
disappeared, suggesting that the tracking mechanisms were in the same
state they had been in prior to disappearance.

We propose that these findings generally indicate that any visual
information stored off-line during task postponement will be available
again rapidly after the task is resumed.  This differs from other
findings of task-switching costs that last for several hundred
milliseconds when people must switch from one task to another (e.g.,
Allport, Styles, & Hsieh, 1994; Rogers & Monsell, 1995; Rubinstein,
Meyer, & Evans, 2001; see Monsell, 2003, for a recent review).  To
perform those tasks successfully, all the processes relevant to
performing one task---including all the knowledge relevant to the
stimuli, stimulus-response mappings, and response preparation---must
be removed from memory and replaced with those of a different task.
The present results suggest that the cost of reloading the visual
information relevant to one task is quite small.  It may be other
aspects of a task, or the act of unloading another task from memory,
that imposes the higher switching costs observed in other studies.

Apply them to driving and other applied tasks
