Target reacquisition strategies in multiple object tracking

David E. Fencsik, Todd S. Horowitz, Sarah B. Klieger, and Jeremy M. Wolfe

Observers in multi-element tracking experiments can successfully track
a subset of randomly moving identical objects, even if all of the
objects disappear for 300-400 ms (e.g., Alvarez, Wolfe, Horowitz, &
Arsenio (VSS 01)). This interval is too long for apparent motion
mechanisms to bridge the gap. How does the visual system reacquire the
target objects when they reappear? Here we test two possible
explanations: According to the location-matching account, the system
stores the location of each target at the time of disappearance. After
the gap, the object closest to each target's pre-gap location is
identified as a target. According to the trajectory-matching account,
the system stores the target trajectories at the time of disappearance
and searches along each object's predicted trajectory after the
gap. In the experiments reported here, observers tracked 5 out of 10
dark gray disks moving randomly on a light gray background for 5000
ms. At a random time during the tracking interval, all the objects
disappeared for 300 ms, then reappeared at various distances from
their pre-gap locations. In Experiment 1, all of the objects
reappeared either at the point of disappearance (position 0) or at the
location expected if each had continued moving at a constant velocity
during the gap (position 1). Performance was superior at position 0,
supporting a location-matching account. In Experiment 2, we added
position -1, which was as far behind position 0 along the trajectory
as position 1 was ahead. The location-matching account predicts that
performance should be best at position 0 and equal for positions -1
and 1. Instead, we found that position -1 produced performance
superior to position 1, and not significantly different from position
0. This result indicates that the visual system takes into account the
history of an object's motion trajectory when reacquiring targets.

Supported by NIH grant MH065576 to TSH.
