%%% $Id: poster.txt,v 1.2 2004/04/11 03:14:57 fencsik Exp $

* Title

Target Reacquisition Strategies in Multiple Object Tracking

David E. Fencsik, Todd S. Horowitz, Sarah B. Klieger, and Jeremy M. Wolfe

* Abstract (modify from original)

Original: Observers in multi-element tracking experiments can
successfully track a subset of randomly moving identical objects, even
if all of the objects disappear for 300-400 ms (e.g., Alvarez, Wolfe,
Horowitz, & Arsenio (VSS 01)). This interval is too long for apparent
motion mechanisms to bridge the gap. How does the visual system
reacquire the target objects when they reappear? Here we test two
possible explanations: According to the location-matching account, the
system stores the location of each target at the time of
disappearance. After the gap, the object closest to each target's
pre-gap location is identified as a target. According to the
trajectory-matching account, the system stores the target trajectories
at the time of disappearance and searches along each object's
predicted trajectory after the gap. In the experiments reported here,
observers tracked 5 out of 10 dark gray disks moving randomly on a
light gray background for 5000 ms. At a random time during the
tracking interval, all the objects disappeared for 300 ms, then
reappeared at various distances from their pre-gap locations. In
Experiment 1, all of the objects reappeared either at the point of
disappearance (position 0) or at the location expected if each had
continued moving at a constant velocity during the gap (position
1). Performance was superior at position 0, supporting a
location-matching account. In Experiment 2, we added position -1,
which was as far behind position 0 along the trajectory as position 1
was ahead. The location-matching account predicts that performance
should be best at position 0 and equal for positions -1 and
1. Instead, we found that position -1 produced performance superior to
position 1, and not significantly different from position 0. This
result indicates that the visual system takes into account the history
of an object's motion trajectory when reacquiring targets.

Supported by NIH grant MH065576 to TSH.

* The Multi-Element Visual Tracking (MVT) Task 

In a multi-element visual tracking (MVT) task, a group of identical
stimuli move independently around a display while participants track a
subset of them. People can successfully track up to about 4 or 5
separate stimuli (Pylyshyn & Storm, 19??; etc). 

{ILLUSTRATION OF MVT TASK}

* Interruption and Resumption of Tracking

Performance of the MVT task is possible even if the stimuli disappear
for a 300-400 ms gap (e.g., Alvarez, Wolfe, Horowitz, & Arsenio, 2001
{VSS01}; ??? & Pylyshyn, VSS03). How do people remember where the
targets were? When they resume tracking, how do they match visible
stimuli with targets in memory? Here, we test two hypotheses about the
information retained about targets when they disappear and the
processes used to reacquire them when they reappear.

Location-Matching Account

According to this account, people remember the locations of each
target when they disappear. Upon reappearance, the stimulus closest to
each target's pre-gap location is selected as a target.

{ILLUSTRATION OF LOCATION-MATCHING ACCOUNT}

Trajectory-Matching Account

According to this account, people remember the trajectories of each
target when they disappear and predict where they should reappear at
any point in time.

{ILLUSTRATION OF TRAJECTORY-MATCHING ACCOUNT}

* Present Experiments

We report a series of experiments using the MVT task with a 300 ms gap
during which all the stimuli become invisible. In the first two
experiments, we manipulated the reappearance locations of the
stimuli. In the second two experiments, we manipulated the type of
information that was available to participants prior to the blank
interval.

* Manipulations of Reappearance Location

In the first two experiments, we manipulated where the stimuli
reappeared following the gap. Each stimulus is at some point p_0 in
the last visible pre-gap frame. If it moves with constant velocity
during the gap (even though it's invisible), then it should reappear
at point p_1; where that is depends on the velocity of the stimulus
and the duration of the blank interval. In principle, the stimulus
could actually reappear anywhere along 

If participants use the pre-gap target
locations to find targets after the gap, then tracking accuracy should
increase



* Experiment 1 (shifttrack2)

* Experiment 2 (shifttrack3)

* Conclusions

* Limitations

* Manipulations of Pre-Disappearance Information

* Experiment 3 (stoptrack1)

* Experiment 4 (stoptrack2)

* Conclusions

Directions for Future Research